documentation/64498-project-life-cycle (#19157)
opf/openproject: docs/system-admin-guide/projects/project-life-cycle/README.md

Each life cycle consists of multiple **project phases**, and each phase can optionally include **start** and **finish phase gates**. These help mark formal checkpoints within your project’s timeline.

Project phases appear in the **overview page** of each project, helping teams clearly communicate project progress.

Existing projects created before the life cycle feature is enabled will not automatically have project phases or gates enabled. New projects will also have this feature disabled by default — you must manually enable it for each project after setup.

> [!NOTE]
>
> While project phases and gates can be customized globally in system administration, they **cannot** be modified per individual project, only enabled or disabled.

By default, OpenProject includes four standard project phases:
- **Initiating**
- **Planning**
- **Executing**
- **Closing**

These four stages, based on the [PM² framework](https://www.openproject.org/blog/blog/pm2-alternative-pmi-prince2/) are created on the global level and available for all installations. Adding new phases or editing existing ones is an Enterprise add-on. 

## Manage project phases (Enterprise add-on)

> [!NOTE]

> > Defining project phases for the project life cycle is an Enterprise add-on and can only be used with [Enterprise cloud](../../../enterprise-guide/enterprise-cloud-guide/)

Reviewer: Hi @MayaBerd, do we want to specify here also to which Enterprise plan do they belong?

Author: So far we didnt specify this in the docs for any other add-ons. I will think about doing it though and then update all notes like this one for all add-ons together

> or [Enterprise on-premises](../../../enterprise-guide/enterprise-on-premises-guide/). An upgrade from the free Community edition is easy and helps support OpenProject.

To manage project phases and gates, navigate to:  *Administration → Projects → Project life cycle*.

Each phase can have a **start gate** and/or a **finish gate**, which are optional and configurable.

![Project phases listed in OpenProject administration](openproject_userguide_project_settings_life_cycle.png)

### Reorder phases

> Project phases are listen in order. You can rearrange the order of the phases within **system administration**:

Reviewer 2: Adding what order that is would improve understandability. Maybe just adding "in order of execution" already does the trick.

> Project phases are listen in order. You can rearrange the order of the phases within **system administration**:

Author: ```suggestion
Project phases are listed in order of execution. You can rearrange the order of the phases within **system administration**:
```

- Use **drag and drop** to move phases into the desired order

- Or click the **More** menu (three dots icon) and select **Move up** or **Move down**

  ![Reorder project phases under OpenProject system settings](openproject_userguide_project_settings_life_cycle_move.png)

> [!NOTE]
>
> The order of project phases is **system-wide** and cannot be changed per project.

### Add a project phase 

To add a new project phase go to *Administration → Projects → Project life cycle* and click the **+ Add** button. You can then enter a name for the new phase and choose a color to visually distinguish the phase. Click **Create**. 

![Add a new project phase under project life cycles in OpenProject system administration](openproject_userguide_project_settings_life_cycle_add_new.png)

### Add a phase gate

> After creating the phase, navigate to the *Phase gate* tab and activate and name start and/or finish phase gates. 

Reviewer 2: Currently at least (but that might change), the gates can be created right along with the phase itself. Meaning, the user wouldn't have to click on the "Save" button before moving to the other tab. And clicking on "Save" there would save the phase along with the gates.

> After creating the phase, navigate to the *Phase gate* tab and activate and name start and/or finish phase gates. 

Author: ```suggestion
After creating the phase or while setting one up, navigate to the *Phase gate* tab and activate and name start and/or finish phase gates. 
```
